labNotes.md, before:

# Week 1

## Self-Study and Orientation

1. Watch the _Introduction to the Kartoza Internship Session_ 

>[Kartoza Interns Introductory Session June 2022](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GCn842i1A3E&t=1196s "Kartoza Interns Introductory Session Video")

2. Install all Suggested Essential Software

[List of Essential Software](essentialSoftware.md 'Essential Software to be Installed') 

3. Introduction to *QGIS* Course

### Reference : [QGIS Community](https://changelog.qgis.org/en/qgis/ 'QGIS Organization')

- QGIS is developed by a team of dedicated volunteers and organisations

- According to [QGIS](https://changelog.qgis.org/en/qgis/ 'Changelog QGIS Organization'), ***QGIS*** is the leading Free and Open Source Desktop GIS. It allows one to create, edit, visualise, analyse and publish geospatial information on Windows, Mac OS, Linux, BSD and Android (via the QField app). We also provide an OGC Web Server application, a web browser client and developer libraries. The QGIS project is under very active development by an enthusiastic and engaged developer community with good mechanisms for help via stack exchange, mailing lists and (optionally) through a global network of commercial support providers. QGIS is a professional GIS application and developer platform. QGIS is built on top of and proud to be itself Free and Open Source Software.

***QGIS Desktop*** : A powerful desktop GIS software to create, edit, visualise, analyse and publish geospatial information.

***QGIS Server & Web Client*** : It publish your QGIS projects and layers as OGC compatible WMS and WFS services.

- QGIS runs on Linux, Unix, Mac OS and Windows and supports numerous vector, raster, and database formats and functionalities.

### Key Features

- QGIS provides a continuously growing number of capabilities provided by core functions and plugins.
- You can visualize, manage, edit, analyse data, and design maps.
- ***Interoperability:*** support for numerous file formats and databases as well as web services.
- ***Customizability:*** freedom to tailor the application to your needs, from custom data input forms to personalized user interfaces and workflows.
- ***Extensibility:*** a C++ core and Python support provide the framework for everything from quick scripts to novel stand-alone applications based on the QGIS API.

4. By learning QGIS one gets to create, edit, visualize, analyse, and, publish geospatial information
5. Start the **Simple Africa Map** project

 > Reference : Follow the [QGIS Road to Nerdvana Episode 15: Making a Small Scale Map of Africa](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LJIiZfA7Iio "Making a Small Map of Africa Youtube Video")

6. Attending the Week's Intern Hangout Meeting helps one get some notes, advice, and corrections required to amend and improve the Final Africa Map



# Week 2

## Project Assignment

- The final **Simple Africa Map** should look like the one below

![Simple Scale Africa Map!](/pics/Simple%20Africa%20Map.png "Simple Africa Map")

- Continuing with the *[QGIS Coursework](https://changelog.qgis.org/en/qgis/lessons/ 'QGIS LESSONS')*

- Signing up with ***[Open Street Map Organization](https://www.openstreetmap.org/ "OpenStreetMap")*** and joining the community gets one ready to start contributing to the OSM by digitizing some map features 

### Open Street Map

1. OpenStreetMap is a free, open geographic database updated and maintained by a community of volunteers via open collaboration. Contributors collect data from surveys, trace from aerial imagery and also import from other freely licensed geodata sources.
2. Login to account / Sign Up to the Open Street Map organization for an Account 
3. Use search bar to navigate to AOI.
4. You can edit the Map with iD (in-browser editor) or Remote Control (JOSM, Potlatch, Merkaartor) 
5. If editing polygons, choose area and trace the boundaries and add a tag. Insert ‘Yes’ if you do not know what 
kind of building the digitised building is, otherwise select from the drop down.
6. Save your work every 10 to 20 edits with a meaningful comment.

### Reference : [GIS COP 21/06/2022 Open Street Map](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mik1yMsxbqI&t=148s 'OSM GIS COP')

- Edit the OSM by:

1. adding missing features
2. commenting present features
3. tagging some features

 adding missing features | commenting present features | tagging some features
 ----------------------- | --------------------------- | ---------------------
![Open Street Map Area Edit!](/pics/Open%20Street%20Map%20Area%20Edit.jpeg  "Open Street Map Area Edit") | ![Open Street Map Commenting!](/pics/Open%20Street%20Map%20Comment%20Edit.jpeg "Open Street Map Commenting") | ![Open Street Map Tagging!](/pics/Open%20Street%20Map%20Tag%20Edit.jpeg "Open Street Map Tagging")
***Adding the name of an unnamed Place of Worship*** | ***Adding a Note to a Map*** | ***Tagging the name of a Place of Worship***
![Open Street Map Line Edit!](/pics/Open%20Street%20Map%20Line%20Edit.jpeg "Open Street Map Line Edit") | | 
***Drawing a missing cycle and footpath*** | | 
![Open Street Map Point Edit!](/pics/Open%20Street%20Map%20Point%20Edit.jpeg "Open Street Map Point Edit") | |
***Changing the name of a Place of Worship*** | |    

### Humanitarian Openstreet Map (HOT)

- [HOT](https://www.hotosm.org/ 'Humanitarian OpenStreetMap Team') is an international team dedicated to humanitarian action and community development through open mapping.
- [Humanitarian OpenStreetMap Team](https://www.giscorps.org/hot-projects/#:~:text=Humanitarian%20OpenStreetMap%20Team%20(HOT)%20is,disaster%20response%20and%20sustainable%20development. "HOT") is a global community of volunteers, community leaders, and professionals who work together to create open map data to support disaster response and sustainable development.
- The HOT Tasking Manager is a mapping tool designed and built for the Humanitarian OpenStreetMap Team's collaborative mapping process in OpenStreetMap. The purpose of the tool is to divide up a mapping project into smaller tasks that can be completed rapidly with many people working on the same overall area.

### GitHub

- Fork the Kartoza Handbook on GitHub as in the image below (You Press Fork)

> ![Forking Kartoza Handbook!](/pics/Screenshot%20Forking%20Kartoza%20Handbook.jpeg  "Kartoza Handbook Forked")

- Sign up and connect your Visual Studio Code with your GitHub Account
- Clone your Forked Kartoza Handbook Repo
- Add or edit the *Cartography Guidelines* with the [Markdown](https://www.markdownguide.org)
- To view Markdown easily, install Markdown All In One and use Ctrl+Shift+V or ‘preview’ icon to see the changes you added in a Markdown Format
- Save work and make a pull request to the original author

Reference : [Deep dive into GitHub with Charlie](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ctmcULgIxms "Watch GitHub Lecture by Charlie")

### Git 

Reference : [Working with Git](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=p5tWDX6Idhs "Working with Git by Tim")

### Markdown:

- Get started with *[Markdown](https://www.markdownguide.org/ "Getting Started with Markdown")*
- Start with *[Markdown Basic Syntax](https://www.markdownguide.org/basic-syntax/ "Markdown Basic Syntax")* then move to *[Markdown Extended Syntax](https://www.markdownguide.org/extended-syntax/ "Markdown Extended Syntax")*

### Intern Hangout Meeting on Friday

1. Make Lab Notes for every exercise as we go, specifically focusing on steps followed, resources used and 
corrections made.
2. A push request is only done to your forked repository, not the original upstream repository. You can only fetch updates from or submit changes to the original repository with pull requests.
3. Extensions to Visual Studio Code include: Markdown All-In-One, Spell Check

### Mapping Party

- Joining a Mapping Party helps one to dive deep into cartography, and learn new tricks about developing and designing _maps_



# Week 3

## Computer Hardware n Software

### Reference : [Computer Firmware](https://www.lifewire.com/computer-hardware-2625895 "Computer Hardware n Software")

Computer hardware refers to the _physical_ components that make up a computer system
There are many different kinds of hardware that can be installed inside, and connected to the outside, of a computer
Computer hardware may sometimes be seen abbreviated as _computer hw_

### List of Computer Hardware

[List of Computer Hardware](computerHardware.md "List of Computer Hardware")

### Hardware vs Software

- A computer system isn't complete unless there's also software, which is different than hardware. The software is data that's stored electronically, like an operating system or a video editing tool, which _runs on the hardware_
- Hardware gets its name due to the fact that it's strict when it comes to modifications, whereas software is more flexible (i.e., you can easily upgrade or change software)
- Firmware is closely related to hardware and software, too. Firmware is used to tie the two together so that a software program knows how to interface with a piece of hardware

### Reference : [Binary and Hexadecimal Numbers explained for Developers](https://www.theserverside.com/tip/Binary-and-hexadecimal-numbers-explained-for-developers 'Binary and Hexadecimal Numbers')

### Binary and Hexadecimal Numbers

[Binary and Hexadecimal Numbers](binaryHexadecimalNumbers.md 'Binary and Hexadecimal Numbers')

*Hex and Binary in Action*

- What's especially interesting about hexadecimal and binary notation is that a hex value simplifies the expression of the value of bytes. Any eight bits in a byte becomes either a one-digit or two-digit hexadecimal numeral.

- For example, a byte with four bits off and four bits on is expressed in binary as 00001111, and converts to f in hexadecimal, while byte of eight bits "on" is 11111111 in binary and ff in hexadecimal.

- Using hexadecimal numerals to express the value of a byte is a powerful technique. For example, engineers who work with serialization formats such as Protocol Buffers and Apache Thrift at the byte level use hexadecimal numbers all the time. When programmers work with the actual bits that those bytes represent, they will use binary notation.

- The ability to interpret and convert binary and hexadecimal number systems is a good tool to have in the toolbox of any DevOps developer. You might not be at the bit and byte level today, but as the scope of computing activities for all types of developers continues to broaden, one day you might.

### Frequently Asked Questions

1. **What are the four main types of computer hardware?** ~ The four primary categories of computer hardware include input devices, output devices, processing devices, and storage devices.
2. **How do you clean your computer hardware?** ~ Learn how to clean your PC to help extend its life and make it run more efficiently. Always unplug computers prior to cleaning, and only use recommended materials such as lint-free cloths, canned air, and carefully applied isopropyl alcohol.



# Week 4

## Learning Python Language

### Python Session (1) with Zakki

[Python Lesson One](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=szqg1I-XcBM&t=3s 'Python Lesson One by Zakki')

- Python is a dynamically typed, garbage-collected, high-level, general-purpose programming language. 
- It supports multiple programming paradigms, including structured, procedural object-oriented and functional programming.

- It can be used in:
1. Web Development 
2. Data Science
3. Tasks Automation
4. Data Analysis and Visualization

### Indentation

- Its design philosophy emphasizes code readability with the use of significant indentation(1 Tabs == 4 spaces)

### Commenting

1. For putting a comment or commenting out one line of code, put a # (Hashtag) in front of the comment or line of code as shown below

\# Commented Out Statement 

2. For commenting 2 or more lines of code use 2 sets of 3 single quotes ['''] or double quotes ["""] one placed above and the other set placed below the lines of code

'''

First Statement

Second Statement
 
Third Statement

'''

**OR**

"""

1st Statement

2nd Statement

3rd Statement

"""

### Variables 

- A variable is used for creating, changing, casting, and storing values

- Python is Case Sensitive for example age , Age and AGE are 3 different variables 

- Types of Casing

1. Camel Casing e.g myVariableName
2. Pascal Casing e.g MyVariableName
3. Snake Casing e.g my_variable_name

### Operators 

Operator | Expression
-------- | ----------
| * | Multiply |        
| + | Add |
| - | Subtract |
| / | Divide |
| // | Divide and return the nearest Integer |
| % | Remainder |
| -- | Exponent | 

### Conditionals 

- if and elif statements are used 

### Loops

- for and while loops are used e.g range(start, end, step) where start is the beginning, end is the stop, step is the interval 

### Functions

- def func name ()

# Week 5

## Learning Python Language

### Python Session (2) with Zakki

[Python Lesson Two](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=di-88FH4ius&t=11s 'Python Lesson Two by Zakki')

### Lists n Tuples

Let a = [4, 3, 1, 2]

Let b = [7, 8]

***Please note that the goals in the table below are carried out individually and separately to achieve the desired result.*** 
***Note the goals are carried out one after the other.***

Goal | Syntax | Result | Notes
---- | ------ | ------ | -----
Ascending Order Arrangement | sorted(a) | [1, 2, 3, 4] | Elements are arranged in Ascending Order
Descending Order Arrangement | sorted(a, reverse=True) | [4, 3, 2, 1] | Elements are arranged in Descending Order
Element Addition | a.append(5) | [4, 3, 1, 2, 5] | Element is added on the next Index
Remove Last Element | a.pop() |ans = 2 hence a = [4, 3, 1] | By default the last element is removed
See First Element | print(a[0]) | 4 | First element is printed **NB: The first element is indexed 0**     
See Last Element | print(a[-1]) | 2 | Last element is printed **NB: The last element is indexed -1** 
List Extension | a.extend([5, 6]) | [4, 3, 1, 2, 5, 6] | The list is extended
Slice | a[0:2:1] | [4, 3] | Part of the list is printed **NB: from the first element [indexed 0] which is inclusive to the element [indexed 1] hence element on index 2 is exclusive** By default the step is 1 if not inserted and it can be altered negatively or positively to determine the number of steps to take in any direction
Combine | a + b | [4, 3, 1, 2, 7, 8] | The two lists are joined together

### Sets

let c = {6, 7, 7, 8, 9}

let d = {3, 6, 8, 9}

Goal | Syntax | Result | Notes
---- | ------ | ------ | -----
Remove Duplicate | print(c) | {6, 7, 8, 9} | Another 7 is removed from the set
Item Addition | c.add(5) | {5, 6, 7, 8, 9} | 5 is added to the set
Union | c.union(d) | {3, 6, 7, 8, 9} | Items from both sets are united together in 1 set
Intersection | c.intersection(d) | {6, 8, 9} | Identical items are brought together is 1 set
Difference | c.difference(d) | {7} | 7 is the difference

### Dictionary

a). **Error Handling**

### Reference : [Python Error Handling](https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/errors.html 'Error Handling Techniques')

**Types of Errors**

1. ValueError
2. SyntaxError 
3. TypeError
4. ConnectionError
5. ZeroDivisionError
6. NameError
7. RuntimeError 
8. FileNotFoundError

- a _try_ statement is used to handle an exception. The _try_ block lets one test a block of code for errors.
- an _except_ block lets one handle an error.
- a _finally_ statement always executes whether exceptions occurred or not. The finally block lets one execute code, regardless of the result of the try and except blocks.
- an _else_ clause only executes when the _try_ clause terminates normally. The _else_ clause is valid only if the _try_ statement has at least one _except_ clause. The _else_ block lets one execute code when there is no error.

b). **File Handling**

- The key function for working with files in Python is the open() function.
- The open() function takes two parameters; *filename*, and *mode*.
- *filename*: gives name of the file that the file object has opened.
- *mode*: attribute of a file object tells you which mode a file was opened in.

**File Modes in Python**

Mode | Description
---- | -----------
‘r’ | This is the default mode. It opens file for reading. It returns an error if the file does not exist.
‘w’	| This mode opens file for writing. If file does not exist, it creates a new file. If file exists it truncates the file.
‘x’ | Creates a new file. If file already exists, it returns an error thus the operation fails.
‘a’ | Open file in append mode. If file does not exist, it creates a new file.
‘t’ | This is the default mode. It opens in text mode.
‘b’ | This opens in binary mode. E.g. Images
‘+’ | This will open a file for reading and writing (updating)

### Object Oriented Programming

#### Classes 

***Definition:*** A class is a code template for creating objects. Objects have member variables and have behaviour associated with them. In python a class is created by the keyword class. An object is created using the constructor of the class. This object will then be called the instance of the class.

#### Libraries 

***Definition:*** A library is a collection of utility methods, classes, and modules that your application code can use to perform specific tasks without writing the functionalities from scratch. It contains bundles of code that can be used repeatedly in different programs. It makes Python Programming simpler and convenient for the Programmer.

Examples of Python libraries:

1. Django
2. SciPy
3. Pandas
4. NumPy
5. TensorFlow
6. PyTorch

# Glossary

[Glossary of Key Terms](glossaryOfKeyTerms.md 'Definition of Key Terminology')

Commit message:

Added Descriptions of Python Errors

labNotes.md, after:

# Week 1

## Self-Study and Orientation

1. Watch the _Introduction to the Kartoza Internship Session_ 

>[Kartoza Interns Introductory Session June 2022](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GCn842i1A3E&t=1196s "Kartoza Interns Introductory Session Video")

2. Install all Suggested Essential Software

[List of Essential Software](essentialSoftware.md 'Essential Software to be Installed') 

3. Introduction to *QGIS* Course

### Reference : [QGIS Community](https://changelog.qgis.org/en/qgis/ 'QGIS Organization')

- QGIS is developed by a team of dedicated volunteers and organisations

- According to [QGIS](https://changelog.qgis.org/en/qgis/ 'Changelog QGIS Organization'), ***QGIS*** is the leading Free and Open Source Desktop GIS. It allows one to create, edit, visualise, analyse and publish geospatial information on Windows, Mac OS, Linux, BSD and Android (via the QField app). We also provide an OGC Web Server application, a web browser client and developer libraries. The QGIS project is under very active development by an enthusiastic and engaged developer community with good mechanisms for help via stack exchange, mailing lists and (optionally) through a global network of commercial support providers. QGIS is a professional GIS application and developer platform. QGIS is built on top of and proud to be itself Free and Open Source Software.

***QGIS Desktop*** : A powerful desktop GIS software to create, edit, visualise, analyse and publish geospatial information.

***QGIS Server & Web Client*** : It publish your QGIS projects and layers as OGC compatible WMS and WFS services.

- QGIS runs on Linux, Unix, Mac OS and Windows and supports numerous vector, raster, and database formats and functionalities.

### Key Features

- QGIS provides a continuously growing number of capabilities provided by core functions and plugins.
- You can visualize, manage, edit, analyse data, and design maps.
- ***Interoperability:*** support for numerous file formats and databases as well as web services.
- ***Customizability:*** freedom to tailor the application to your needs, from custom data input forms to personalized user interfaces and workflows.
- ***Extensibility:*** a C++ core and Python support provide the framework for everything from quick scripts to novel stand-alone applications based on the QGIS API.

4. By learning QGIS one gets to create, edit, visualize, analyse, and, publish geospatial information
5. Start the **Simple Africa Map** project

 > Reference : Follow the [QGIS Road to Nerdvana Episode 15: Making a Small Scale Map of Africa](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LJIiZfA7Iio "Making a Small Map of Africa Youtube Video")

6. Attending the Week's Intern Hangout Meeting helps one get some notes, advice, and corrections required to amend and improve the Final Africa Map



# Week 2

## Project Assignment

- The final **Simple Africa Map** should look like the one below

![Simple Scale Africa Map!](/pics/Simple%20Africa%20Map.png "Simple Africa Map")

- Continuing with the *[QGIS Coursework](https://changelog.qgis.org/en/qgis/lessons/ 'QGIS LESSONS')*

- Signing up with ***[Open Street Map Organization](https://www.openstreetmap.org/ "OpenStreetMap")*** and joining the community gets one ready to start contributing to the OSM by digitizing some map features 

### Open Street Map

1. OpenStreetMap is a free, open geographic database updated and maintained by a community of volunteers via open collaboration. Contributors collect data from surveys, trace from aerial imagery and also import from other freely licensed geodata sources.
2. Login to account / Sign Up to the Open Street Map organization for an Account 
3. Use search bar to navigate to AOI.
4. You can edit the Map with iD (in-browser editor) or Remote Control (JOSM, Potlatch, Merkaartor) 
5. If editing polygons, choose area and trace the boundaries and add a tag. Insert ‘Yes’ if you do not know what 
kind of building the digitised building is, otherwise select from the drop down.
6. Save your work every 10 to 20 edits with a meaningful comment.

### Reference : [GIS COP 21/06/2022 Open Street Map](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mik1yMsxbqI&t=148s 'OSM GIS COP')

- Edit the OSM by:

1. adding missing features
2. commenting present features
3. tagging some features

 adding missing features | commenting present features | tagging some features
 ----------------------- | --------------------------- | ---------------------
![Open Street Map Area Edit!](/pics/Open%20Street%20Map%20Area%20Edit.jpeg  "Open Street Map Area Edit") | ![Open Street Map Commenting!](/pics/Open%20Street%20Map%20Comment%20Edit.jpeg "Open Street Map Commenting") | ![Open Street Map Tagging!](/pics/Open%20Street%20Map%20Tag%20Edit.jpeg "Open Street Map Tagging")
***Adding the name of an unnamed Place of Worship*** | ***Adding a Note to a Map*** | ***Tagging the name of a Place of Worship***
![Open Street Map Line Edit!](/pics/Open%20Street%20Map%20Line%20Edit.jpeg "Open Street Map Line Edit") | | 
***Drawing a missing cycle and footpath*** | | 
![Open Street Map Point Edit!](/pics/Open%20Street%20Map%20Point%20Edit.jpeg "Open Street Map Point Edit") | |
***Changing the name of a Place of Worship*** | |    

### Humanitarian Openstreet Map (HOT)

- [HOT](https://www.hotosm.org/ 'Humanitarian OpenStreetMap Team') is an international team dedicated to humanitarian action and community development through open mapping.
- [Humanitarian OpenStreetMap Team](https://www.giscorps.org/hot-projects/#:~:text=Humanitarian%20OpenStreetMap%20Team%20(HOT)%20is,disaster%20response%20and%20sustainable%20development. "HOT") is a global community of volunteers, community leaders, and professionals who work together to create open map data to support disaster response and sustainable development.
- The HOT Tasking Manager is a mapping tool designed and built for the Humanitarian OpenStreetMap Team's collaborative mapping process in OpenStreetMap. The purpose of the tool is to divide up a mapping project into smaller tasks that can be completed rapidly with many people working on the same overall area.

### GitHub

- Fork the Kartoza Handbook on GitHub as in the image below (You Press Fork)

> ![Forking Kartoza Handbook!](/pics/Screenshot%20Forking%20Kartoza%20Handbook.jpeg  "Kartoza Handbook Forked")

- Sign up and connect your Visual Studio Code with your GitHub Account
- Clone your Forked Kartoza Handbook Repo
- Add or edit the *Cartography Guidelines* with the [Markdown](https://www.markdownguide.org)
- To view Markdown easily, install Markdown All In One and use Ctrl+Shift+V or ‘preview’ icon to see the changes you added in a Markdown Format
- Save work and make a pull request to the original author

Reference : [Deep dive into GitHub with Charlie](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ctmcULgIxms "Watch GitHub Lecture by Charlie")

### Git 

Reference : [Working with Git](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=p5tWDX6Idhs "Working with Git by Tim")

### Markdown:

- Get started with *[Markdown](https://www.markdownguide.org/ "Getting Started with Markdown")*
- Start with *[Markdown Basic Syntax](https://www.markdownguide.org/basic-syntax/ "Markdown Basic Syntax")* then move to *[Markdown Extended Syntax](https://www.markdownguide.org/extended-syntax/ "Markdown Extended Syntax")*

### Intern Hangout Meeting on Friday

1. Make Lab Notes for every exercise as we go, specifically focusing on steps followed, resources used and 
corrections made.
2. A push request is only done to your forked repository, not the original upstream repository. You can only fetch updates from or submit changes to the original repository with pull requests.
3. Extensions to Visual Studio Code include: Markdown All-In-One, Spell Check

### Mapping Party

- Joining a Mapping Party helps one to dive deep into cartography, and learn new tricks about developing and designing _maps_



# Week 3

## Computer Hardware n Software

### Reference : [Computer Firmware](https://www.lifewire.com/computer-hardware-2625895 "Computer Hardware n Software")

Computer hardware refers to the _physical_ components that make up a computer system
There are many different kinds of hardware that can be installed inside, and connected to the outside, of a computer
Computer hardware may sometimes be seen abbreviated as _computer hw_

### List of Computer Hardware

[List of Computer Hardware](computerHardware.md "List of Computer Hardware")

### Hardware vs Software

- A computer system isn't complete unless there's also software, which is different than hardware. The software is data that's stored electronically, like an operating system or a video editing tool, which _runs on the hardware_
- Hardware gets its name due to the fact that it's strict when it comes to modifications, whereas software is more flexible (i.e., you can easily upgrade or change software)
- Firmware is closely related to hardware and software, too. Firmware is used to tie the two together so that a software program knows how to interface with a piece of hardware

### Reference : [Binary and Hexadecimal Numbers explained for Developers](https://www.theserverside.com/tip/Binary-and-hexadecimal-numbers-explained-for-developers 'Binary and Hexadecimal Numbers')

### Binary and Hexadecimal Numbers

[Binary and Hexadecimal Numbers](binaryHexadecimalNumbers.md 'Binary and Hexadecimal Numbers')

*Hex and Binary in Action*

- What's especially interesting about hexadecimal and binary notation is that a hex value simplifies the expression of the value of bytes. Any eight bits in a byte becomes either a one-digit or two-digit hexadecimal numeral.

- For example, a byte with four bits off and four bits on is expressed in binary as 00001111, and converts to f in hexadecimal, while byte of eight bits "on" is 11111111 in binary and ff in hexadecimal.

- Using hexadecimal numerals to express the value of a byte is a powerful technique. For example, engineers who work with serialization formats such as Protocol Buffers and Apache Thrift at the byte level use hexadecimal numbers all the time. When programmers work with the actual bits that those bytes represent, they will use binary notation.

- The ability to interpret and convert binary and hexadecimal number systems is a good tool to have in the toolbox of any DevOps developer. You might not be at the bit and byte level today, but as the scope of computing activities for all types of developers continues to broaden, one day you might.

### Frequently Asked Questions

1. **What are the four main types of computer hardware?** ~ The four primary categories of computer hardware include input devices, output devices, processing devices, and storage devices.
2. **How do you clean your computer hardware?** ~ Learn how to clean your PC to help extend its life and make it run more efficiently. Always unplug computers prior to cleaning, and only use recommended materials such as lint-free cloths, canned air, and carefully applied isopropyl alcohol.



# Week 4

## Learning Python Language

### Python Session (1) with Zakki

[Python Lesson One](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=szqg1I-XcBM&t=3s 'Python Lesson One by Zakki')

- Python is a dynamically typed, garbage-collected, high-level, general-purpose programming language. 
- It supports multiple programming paradigms, including structured, procedural object-oriented and functional programming.

- It can be used in:
1. Web Development 
2. Data Science
3. Tasks Automation
4. Data Analysis and Visualization

### Indentation

- Its design philosophy emphasizes code readability with the use of significant indentation(1 Tabs == 4 spaces)

### Commenting

1. For putting a comment or commenting out one line of code, put a # (Hashtag) in front of the comment or line of code as shown below

\# Commented Out Statement 

2. For commenting 2 or more lines of code use 2 sets of 3 single quotes ['''] or double quotes ["""] one placed above and the other set placed below the lines of code

'''

First Statement

Second Statement
 
Third Statement

'''

**OR**

"""

1st Statement

2nd Statement

3rd Statement

"""

### Variables 

- A variable is used for creating, changing, casting, and storing values

- Python is Case Sensitive for example age , Age and AGE are 3 different variables 

- Types of Casing

1. Camel Casing e.g myVariableName
2. Pascal Casing e.g MyVariableName
3. Snake Casing e.g my_variable_name

### Operators 

Operator | Expression
-------- | ----------
| * | Multiply |        
| + | Add |
| - | Subtract |
| / | Divide |
| // | Divide and return the nearest Integer |
| % | Remainder |
| -- | Exponent | 

### Conditionals 

- if and elif statements are used 

### Loops

- for and while loops are used e.g range(start, end, step) where start is the beginning, end is the stop, step is the interval 

### Functions

- def func name ()

# Week 5

## Learning Python Language

### Python Session (2) with Zakki

[Python Lesson Two](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=di-88FH4ius&t=11s 'Python Lesson Two by Zakki')

### Lists n Tuples

Let a = [4, 3, 1, 2]

Let b = [7, 8]

***Please note that the goals in the table below are carried out individually and separately to achieve the desired result.*** 
***Note the goals are carried out one after the other.***

Goal | Syntax | Result | Notes
---- | ------ | ------ | -----
Ascending Order Arrangement | sorted(a) | [1, 2, 3, 4] | Elements are arranged in Ascending Order
Descending Order Arrangement | sorted(a, reverse=True) | [4, 3, 2, 1] | Elements are arranged in Descending Order
Element Addition | a.append(5) | [4, 3, 1, 2, 5] | Element is added on the next Index
Remove Last Element | a.pop() |ans = 2 hence a = [4, 3, 1] | By default the last element is removed
See First Element | print(a[0]) | 4 | First element is printed **NB: The first element is indexed 0**     
See Last Element | print(a[-1]) | 2 | Last element is printed **NB: The last element is indexed -1** 
List Extension | a.extend([5, 6]) | [4, 3, 1, 2, 5, 6] | The list is extended
Slice | a[0:2:1] | [4, 3] | Part of the list is printed **NB: from the first element [indexed 0] which is inclusive to the element [indexed 1] hence element on index 2 is exclusive** By default the step is 1 if not inserted and it can be altered negatively or positively to determine the number of steps to take in any direction
Combine | a + b | [4, 3, 1, 2, 7, 8] | The two lists are joined together

### Sets

let c = {6, 7, 7, 8, 9}

let d = {3, 6, 8, 9}

Goal | Syntax | Result | Notes
---- | ------ | ------ | -----
Remove Duplicate | print(c) | {6, 7, 8, 9} | Another 7 is removed from the set
Item Addition | c.add(5) | {5, 6, 7, 8, 9} | 5 is added to the set
Union | c.union(d) | {3, 6, 7, 8, 9} | Items from both sets are united together in 1 set
Intersection | c.intersection(d) | {6, 8, 9} | Identical items are brought together is 1 set
Difference | c.difference(d) | {7} | 7 is the difference

### Dictionary

a). **Error Handling**

### Reference : [Python Error Handling](https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/errors.html 'Error Handling Techniques')

**Types of Errors**

PythonError | Description
----- | -----------
ValueError | An exception that occurs when a function receives an argument of the correct data type but an inappropriate value. This error usually occurs in mathematical operations that require a certain kind of value.
SyntaxError | An error in the arrangement of words and phrases to create well-formed structured statements and sentences in a particular coding language or programming language, entered by a programmer. For compiled languages, syntax errors are detected at compile-time. A program will not compile until all syntax errors are corrected.
TypeError | An exception that occurs when the data type of an object in an operation is inappropriate. This can happen when an operation is performed on an object of an incorrect type, or it is not supported for the object.
ConnectionError | This will be raised, if there is any connection error. For example, the network failed, Domain Name System error so the Request library will raise ConnectionError exception.
ZeroDivisionError | A built-in Python exception thrown when a number is divided by 0.
NameError | It occurs when you try to use a variable, function, or module that doesn't exist or wasn't used in a valid way. 
RuntimeError | A type of error that occurs during program execution. The Python interpreter executes a script if it is syntactically correct. However, if it encounters an issue at runtime, which is not detected when the script is parsed, script execution may halt unexpectedly.
FileNotFoundError | It indicates that Python cannot find the file you are referencing. Python raises this error because your program cannot continue running without being able to access the file to which your program refers.

- a _try_ statement is used to handle an exception. The _try_ block lets one test a block of code for errors.
- an _except_ block lets one handle an error.
- a _finally_ statement always executes whether exceptions occurred or not. The finally block lets one execute code, regardless of the result of the try and except blocks.
- an _else_ clause only executes when the _try_ clause terminates normally. The _else_ clause is valid only if the _try_ statement has at least one _except_ clause. The _else_ block lets one execute code when there is no error.

b). **File Handling**

- The key function for working with files in Python is the open() function.
- The open() function takes two parameters; *filename*, and *mode*.
- *filename*: gives name of the file that the file object has opened.
- *mode*: attribute of a file object tells you which mode a file was opened in.

**File Modes in Python**

Mode | Description
---- | -----------
‘r’ | This is the default mode. It opens file for reading. It returns an error if the file does not exist.
‘w’	| This mode opens file for writing. If file does not exist, it creates a new file. If file exists it truncates the file.
‘x’ | Creates a new file. If file already exists, it returns an error thus the operation fails.
‘a’ | Open file in append mode. If file does not exist, it creates a new file.
‘t’ | This is the default mode. It opens in text mode.
‘b’ | This opens in binary mode. E.g. Images
‘+’ | This will open a file for reading and writing (updating)

### Object Oriented Programming

#### Classes 

***Definition:*** A class is a code template for creating objects. Objects have member variables and have behaviour associated with them. In python a class is created by the keyword class. An object is created using the constructor of the class. This object will then be called the instance of the class.

#### Libraries 

***Definition:*** A library is a collection of utility methods, classes, and modules that your application code can use to perform specific tasks without writing the functionalities from scratch. It contains bundles of code that can be used repeatedly in different programs. It makes Python Programming simpler and convenient for the Programmer.

Examples of Python libraries:

1. Django
2. SciPy
3. Pandas
4. NumPy
5. TensorFlow
6. PyTorch

# Glossary

[Glossary of Key Terms](glossaryOfKeyTerms.md 'Definition of Key Terminology')
